# 层次化索引

`MultiIndex` 

```python
class pandas.MultiIndex(levels=None, codes=None, sortorder=None, names=None, dtype=None, copy=False, name=None, verify_integrity=True)
```

A multi-level, or hierarchical, index object for pandas objects.

Parameters

- **levels**sequence of arrays

  The unique labels for each level.



[pandas.MultiIndex — pandas 2.0.3 documentation (pydata.org)](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.MultiIndex.html?highlight=multiindex#pandas.MultiIndex)

```python
DataFrame.stack(level=- 1, dropna=True)
```

Stack the prescribed level(s) from columns to index.

Parameters

- **level**int, str, list, default -1Level(s) to stack from the column axis onto the index axis, defined as one index or label, or a list of indices or labels.
- **dropna**bool, default True Whether to drop rows in the resulting Frame/Series with missing values. Stacking a column level onto the index axis can create combinations of index and column values that are missing from the original dataframe. See Examples section.

Returns

- DataFrame or SeriesStacked dataframe or series.

[pandas.DataFrame.stack — pandas 2.0.3 documentation (pydata.org)](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.stack.html?highlight=stack#pandas.DataFrame.stack)



```python
DataFrame.unstack(level=- 1, fill_value=None)
```

Pivot a level of the (necessarily hierarchical) index labels.

Parameters

- **level**int, str, or list of these, default -1 (last level)

  Level(s) of index to unstack, can pass level name.

- **fill_value**int, str or dict

  Replace NaN with this value if the unstack produces missing values.

Returns

- Series or DataFrame

[pandas.DataFrame.unstack — pandas 2.0.3 documentation (pydata.org)](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.unstack.html?highlight=stack#pandas.DataFrame.unstack)

`nlevels`  知道索引有多少层



## 重排序和层级索引

```python
DataFrame.swaplevel(i=- 2, j=- 1, axis=0)
```

Swap levels i and j in a [`MultiIndex`](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.MultiIndex.html#pandas.MultiIndex).

Parameters

- **i, j**int or str

  Levels of the indices to be swapped. Can pass level name as string.

- **axis**{0 or ‘index’, 1 or ‘columns’}, default 0

  The axis to swap levels on. 0 or ‘index’ for row-wise, 1 or ‘columns’ for column-wise.

Returns

- DataFrame

  DataFrame with levels swapped in MultiIndex.

[pandas.DataFrame.swaplevel — pandas 2.0.3 documentation (pydata.org)](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.swaplevel.html?highlight=swaplevel#pandas.DataFrame.swaplevel)



```python
DataFrame.sort_index(*, axis=0, level=None, ascending=True, inplace=False, kind='quicksort', na_position='last', sort_remaining=True, ignore_index=False, key=None)
```

Sort object by labels (along an axis).

Parameters

- **axis**{0 or ‘index’, 1 or ‘columns’}, default 0

  The axis along which to sort. The value 0 identifies the rows, and 1 identifies the columns.

- **level**int or level name or list of ints or list of level names

  If not None, sort on values in specified index level(s).

- **ascending**bool or list-like of bools, default True

  Sort ascending vs. descending. When the index is a MultiIndex the sort direction can be controlled for each level individually.

Returns

- DataFrame or None

  The original DataFrame sorted by the labels or None if `inplace=True`.

[pandas.DataFrame.sort_index — pandas 2.0.3 documentation (pydata.org)](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.sort_index.html?highlight=sort_index)

## 按层级进行汇总统计

```python
DataFrame.groupby(by=None, axis=0, level=None, as_index=True, sort=True, group_keys=True, observed=False, dropna=True)
```

Group DataFrame using a mapper or by a Series of columns.

Parameters

- **by**mapping, function, label, pd.Grouper or list of such

  Used to determine the groups for the groupby. If `by` is a function, it’s called on each value of the object’s index. If a dict or Series is passed, the Series or dict VALUES will be used to determine the groups (the Series’ values are first aligned; see `.align()` method). If a list or ndarray of length equal to the selected axis is passed (see the [groupby user guide](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/user_guide/groupby.html#splitting-an-object-into-groups)), the values are used as-is to determine the groups. A label or list of labels may be passed to group by the columns in `self`. Notice that a tuple is interpreted as a (single) key.

Returns

- DataFrameGroupBy

  Returns a groupby object that contains information about the groups.

## 使用DataFrame的列进行索引

```python
DataFrame.set_index(keys, *, drop=True, append=False, inplace=False, verify_integrity=False)
```

Set the DataFrame index using existing columns.

Parameters

- **keys**label or array-like or list of labels/arrays

  This parameter can be either a single column key, a single array of the same length as the calling DataFrame, or a list containing an arbitrary combination of column keys and arrays. Here, “array” encompasses [`Series`](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.Series.html#pandas.Series), [`Index`](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.Index.html#pandas.Index), `np.ndarray`, and instances of [`Iterator`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.abc.html#collections.abc.Iterator).

- **drop**bool, default True

  Delete columns to be used as the new index.

Returns

- DataFrame or None

  Changed row labels or None if `inplace=True`.

[pandas.DataFrame.set_index — pandas 2.0.3 documentation (pydata.org)](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.set_index.html?highlight=set_index)

```python
DataFrame.reset_index(level=None, *, drop=False, inplace=False, col_level=0, col_fill='', allow_duplicates=_NoDefault.no_default, names=None)
```

Reset the index, or a level of it.

Parameters

- **level**int, str, tuple, or list, default None

  Only remove the given levels from the index. Removes all levels by default.

- **drop**bool, default False

  Do not try to insert index into dataframe columns. This resets the index to the default integer index.

Returns

- DataFrame or None

  DataFrame with the new index or None if `inplace=True`.

# 联合与合并数据集

## 数据库风格的DataFrame连接



## 根据索引合并



## 轴向拼接



# 重塑与透视

## 使用层次化索引进行重塑



## 将长格式透视为宽格式



## 将宽格式透视为长格式



